Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) is AWS’s fully managed Kubernetes platform that simplifies running, scaling, and securing containerized applications across cloud, on-premises, and edge environments. It removes the heavy lifting of managing Kubernetes clusters while integrating tightly with AWS services for performance, cost optimization, and security.

🔑 Key Features of Amazon EKS
Managed Control Plane: AWS runs and scales the Kubernetes control plane across multiple Availability Zones for high availability.

EKS Auto Mode: Automates compute, storage, and networking management, including node provisioning, scaling, patching, and cost optimization.

Hybrid & Anywhere Support: Run Kubernetes clusters in AWS, on-premises (EKS Anywhere), or edge locations (EKS Hybrid Nodes).

Security Integration: Native integration with AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM), AWS Key Management Service (KMS), and other security services.

Flexibility in Compute: Supports both Amazon EC2 and AWS Fargate for running workloads.

Certified Kubernetes-Conformant: Ensures compatibility with upstream Kubernetes tools and plug-ins.

📊 EKS Deployment Options
Option	         What AWS Manages	                 Best Use Case
EKS Standard	Control plane only	   Teams needing flexibility to manage worker nodes themselves
EKS Auto Mode	Control plane + nodes (data plane)	Teams wanting full automation, reduced ops overhead, and cost optimization

🚀 Common Use Cases
AI/ML Workloads: Distributed training and inference with Kubernetes flexibility and AWS scalability.

Data Platforms: Cost-efficient batch processing and big data workloads.

Internal Developer Platforms: Standardized environments combining open-source Kubernetes with AWS services.

Hybrid Applications: Unified management across cloud, on-premises, and edge.

⚠️ Challenges & Trade-offs
Cost Management: While Auto Mode optimizes costs, large-scale workloads can still be expensive if not monitored.

Learning Curve: Kubernetes concepts (pods, deployments, services) must be understood before leveraging EKS effectively.

Vendor Lock-in: Deep AWS integration may limit portability compared to self-managed Kubernetes clusters.

Networking Complexity: Configuring VPC, security groups, and IAM roles correctly is critical to avoid misconfigurations.

📌 Why Choose EKS?
Reliability: Runs across multiple AZs with automated failover.

Scalability: Seamlessly scales workloads to meet demand.

Security: Built-in AWS compliance and security services.

Consistency: Same Kubernetes experience across AWS cloud, on-premises, and edge

👉 If you’re preparing for AWS interviews, focus on:

EKS architecture (control plane vs. data plane)

EKS Auto Mode vs. Standard Mode

Integration with IAM, VPC, and AWS services

Real-world use cases (AI/ML, hybrid apps, data platforms)

🏗️ Cluster Management
eksctl create cluster --name myCluster --region us-east-1 --nodes 3 → Create a new EKS cluster

eksctl get cluster → List all clusters

eksctl delete cluster --name myCluster → Delete a cluster

aws eks update-kubeconfig --region us-east-1 --name myCluster → Update kubeconfig to connect kubectl to EKS

📦 Node Group Management
eksctl create nodegroup --cluster myCluster --name ng1 --nodes 3 → Add a node group

eksctl get nodegroup --cluster myCluster → List node groups

eksctl delete nodegroup --cluster myCluster --name ng1 → Remove a node group

🌐 Deployments & Services (via kubectl)
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml → Deploy workloads

kubectl get pods -n mynamespace → List pods in a namespace

kubectl get svc → List services

kubectl describe svc myservice → Inspect service details

🔍 Monitoring & Debugging
kubectl logs <pod-name> → View pod logs

kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- bash → Open shell inside pod

kubectl get events → Show cluster events

kubectl top nodes → Resource usage of nodes

kubectl top pods → Resource usage of pods

⚙️ Scaling & Updates
kubectl scale deployment myapp --replicas=5 → Scale pods

kubectl rollout status deployment/myapp → Check rollout progress

kubectl rollout undo deployment/myapp → Rollback deployment

🗣️ Interview Narration Tip

“In real projects, I use eksctl for cluster and node group management, and kubectl for deployments, scaling, and debugging. The combination of these commands covers the full lifecycle of EKS workloads.”

✅ Bottom Line:  
EKS commands are a mix of eksctl (cluster/node ops) and kubectl (workload ops). Together, they let you create, manage, scale, and troubleshoot Kubernetes clusters on AWS.

