Apache Maven is a powerful build automation and dependency management tool for Java projects. It uses a declarative XML file called pom.xml to define project structure, dependencies, plugins, and build lifecycle, making builds consistent and reproducible across environments.

🔑 Key Features of Maven
Project Object Model (POM) → Central configuration file (pom.xml) that defines dependencies, plugins, and build steps.

Dependency Management → Automatically downloads required JARs from Maven Central Repository.

Standard Directory Layout → Enforces a consistent project structure (src/main/java, src/test/java).

Plugins → Extend functionality (e.g., Surefire for testing, Compiler plugin for compilation).

Lifecycle Management → Built-in phases like compile, test, package, install, deploy.

Multi-Module Projects → Supports large projects with multiple submodules.

⚙️ How Maven Works
Define POM → Add dependencies and plugins in pom.xml.

Run Maven Commands → Example:

mvn compile → Compiles source code.

mvn test → Runs unit tests.

mvn package → Creates JAR/WAR file.

mvn install → Installs artifact into local repository.

Dependency Resolution → Maven checks local repo, then downloads missing dependencies from Maven Central.

Build Lifecycle Execution → Executes phases in order, ensuring consistent builds.

📊 Maven vs Gradle
Feature                	Maven	                             Gradle
Configuration	    XML (pom.xml)	                         Groovy/Kotlin DSL
Performance	      Slower (XML parsing)	                    Faster (incremental builds)
Learning Curve	 Easier for beginners	              More flexible, steeper learning
Community	     Larger, older	                         Growing rapidly
Best Use Case	 Standard Java projects	              Complex builds, multi-language projects


🚫 Limitations
Verbose XML configuration.

Slower builds compared to Gradle.

Less flexible for non-Java projects.

🧠 Best Practices
Always specify dependency versions to avoid conflicts.

Use dependency management section for consistent versions across modules.

Keep plugins updated to avoid compatibility issues.

Use Maven Wrapper (mvnw) to ensure consistent Maven version across environments.

✅ Bottom Line: Maven is ideal for Java developers who want a standardized, reliable build system with strong dependency management. For highly customized or multi-language builds, Gradle may be better, but Maven remains the industry standard for most Java projects.


⚙️ Lifecycle Phases
validate → Check project correctness

compile → Compile source code

test → Run unit tests

package → Create JAR/WAR

verify → Run integration tests

install → Install artifact into local repo

deploy → Push artifact to remote repo

🛠️ Common Commands
mvn clean → Remove target/ directory

mvn compile → Compile source code

mvn test → Run tests

mvn package → Build JAR/WAR

mvn install → Install locally

mvn deploy → Deploy to remote repo

mvn dependency:tree → Show dependency hierarchy

mvn site → Generate project documentation

📦 Dependency Management
mvn dependency:tree → Shows dependency hierarchy.

mvn dependency:list → Lists all dependencies.

mvn dependency:analyze → Analyzes dependency usage.

mvn dependency:purge-local-repository → Clears local repo cache.

🧪 Testing
mvn test → Run unit tests.

mvn surefire:test → Run tests with Surefire plugin.

mvn failsafe:integration-test → Run integration tests.

mvn verify → Verify results of integration tests.

📖 Documentation & Reports
mvn site → Generates project documentation site.

mvn site:run → Runs documentation site locally.

mvn project-info-reports:dependencies → Generates dependency report.

🔧 Plugins & Goals
mvn compiler:compile → Compile source code explicitly.

mvn exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="com.example.Main" → Run Java class.

mvn archetype:generate → Create new project from archetype.

mvn install:install-file → Install external JAR into local repo.

🚀 Other Useful Commands
mvn help:effective-pom → Shows merged POM with inherited configs.

mvn help:effective-settings → Shows effective Maven settings.

mvn versions:display-dependency-updates → Lists newer dependency versions.

mvn versions:display-plugin-updates → Lists newer plugin versions.

✅ Bottom Line: These commands cover cleaning, building, testing, dependency management, documentation, and plugin execution — everything you’ll need for interviews and real-world projects.

Maven LifeCycle

Maven’s end-to-end lifecycle is built around three major lifecycles — default, clean, and site — each composed of sequential phases. The most important is the default lifecycle, which runs from validate all the way to deploy, ensuring your project is compiled, tested, packaged, verified, installed locally, and finally deployed to a remote repository.

🔑 Maven Lifecycles Overview
Maven defines three core lifecycles:

Default Lifecycle → Handles project build and deployment.

Clean Lifecycle → Cleans up artifacts from previous builds.

Site Lifecycle → Generates and publishes project documentation.

📂 Default Lifecycle (End-to-End Phases)
This is the most commonly used lifecycle. It includes the following phases executed in order:

Phase	                                        Purpose
validate	                   Check project structure and required info.
initialize                     Initialize build state (e.g., properties).
generate-sources	           Generate source code (if needed).
process-sources	               Process source code (e.g., filtering).
compile                        Compile Java source files.
process-classes	               Post-process compiled classes.
generate-test-sources	       Generate test source code.
process-test-sources	       Process test source code.
test-compile	               Compile test classes.
test	                       Run unit tests (without packaging).
prepare-package	               Prepare for packaging (e.g., bytecode enhancement).
package	                       Bundle compiled code into JAR/WAR.
pre-integration-test	       Setup integration test environment.
integration-test	           Run integration tests.
post-integration-test	       Cleanup after integration tests.
verify	                       Run checks to ensure quality criteria are met.
install	                       Install artifact into local Maven repository.
deploy	                       Copy final package to remote repository.


👉 Key point: You don’t need to run every phase manually. Running mvn install will execute all prior phases in sequence up to install. Running mvn deploy executes the full chain up to deployment.

🧹 Clean Lifecycle
pre-clean → Tasks before cleaning.

clean → Remove target/ directory and build artifacts.

post-clean → Tasks after cleaning.

📖 Site Lifecycle
pre-site → Preparation before site generation.

site → Generate project documentation site.

post-site → Tasks after site generation.

site-deploy → Deploy site to a server.

⚙️ Practical Usage
mvn clean install → Cleans old builds, compiles, tests, packages, and installs locally.

mvn deploy → Full build + deployment to remote repository.

mvn site → Generates project documentation.

🚨 Risks & Best Practices
Skipping phases: Running mvn package skips install and deploy. Use carefully depending on your goal.

Integration tests: Often overlooked, but critical for CI/CD pipelines.

Dependency conflicts: Pin versions in pom.xml to avoid build failures.

Automation: Use Maven Wrapper (mvnw) for consistent builds across environments.